Blog: Python Tooling Improvements (#4076)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/announcing-python-tooling-improvements/index.md

<!--more-->

## Type Annotations

[PEP 484](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0484/) type annotations have been added to all Python APIs, allowing IDEs like [PyCharm](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/) and [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com) and tools like [mypy](http://mypy-lang.org) to catch errors earlier.

Consider the following example for retrieving an AMI, with an incorrect `most_recent` argument:

```python
from pulumi_aws import get_ami

ami = get_ami(most_recent="true",
              owners=["137112412989"],
              filters=[{"name": "name", "values": ["amzn-ami-hvm-*"]}])
```

PyCharm shows the error:

![PyCharm](pycharm-type-error.png)

As does VS Code with mypy:

![VS Code](vscode-type-error.png)

And running `mypy` manually also reports the issue:

```sh
$ mypy __main__.py
__main__.py:3: error: Argument "most_recent" to "get_ami" has incompatible type "str"; expected "Optional[bool]"
Found 1 error in 1 file (checked 1 source file)
```

## Data Classes

> Consider an AWS bucket used to host a static website. Previously, the `website` and `cors_rules` inputs needed to be specified as raw `dict`s:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider an AWS bucket hosting a static website. Previously, the `website` and `cors_rules` inputs needed to be specified as raw `dict`s:
```

```python
from pulumi_aws import s3

my_bucket = s3.Bucket("my-bucket",
    acl="public-read",
    website={
        "indexDocument": "index.html",
        "errorDocument": "error.html",
    },
    cors_rules=[{
        "allowedHeaders": ["*"],
        "allowedMethods": ["PUT", "POST"],
        "allowedOrigins": ["https://s3-website-test.mydomain.com"],
        "exposeHeaders": ["ETag"],
        "maxAgeSeconds": 3000,
    }],
)
```

> You would likely have several questions if writing the above example from scratch. What keys can be set for `website` and `cors_rules`? Should the keys be camelCase or snake_case? Which keys are required? What are the types of the values? To answer these questions, you'd need to refer to [`Bucket`]({{< relref "/docs/reference/pkg/aws/s3/bucket" >}})'s documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You would likely have several questions if writing the above example from scratch. What keys can be set for `website` and `cors_rules`? Should the keys be camelCase or snake_case? Which keys are required? What are the types of values? To answer these questions, you'd need to refer to [`Bucket`]({{< relref "/docs/reference/pkg/aws/s3/bucket" >}})'s documentation.
```

We now allow optionally passing nested values using data classes:

```python
from pulumi_aws import s3

my_bucket = s3.Bucket("my-bucket",
    acl="public-read",
    website=s3.BucketWebsiteArgs(
        index_document="index.html",
        error_document="error.html",
    ),
    cors_rules=[s3.BucketCorsRuleArgs(
        allowed_headers=["*"],
        allowed_methods=["PUT", "POST"],
        allowed_origins=["https://s3-website-test.mydomain.com"],
        expose_headers=["ETag"],
        max_age_seconds=3000,
    )],
)
```

IDEs can display argument names and types, reducing the need to refer to documentation. If a required argument is missing, or a value isn't the right type, IDEs will immediately show the problem, allowing errors to be caught earlier.

The use of data classes makes setting nested values consistent with top-level values, with arguments that are always snake_case, for a more Pythonic feel.

Here's what this looks like in VS Code using the new [Pylance](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/python/announcing-pylance-fast-feature-rich-language-support-for-python-in-visual-studio-code/) language server for Python:

![VS Code](vscode-bucket.png)

> Support for passing data classes is a fully compatible change. Nested data can be passed as either raw `dict`s or as data classes, so existing programs using `dict`s will continue to work as-is without modification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Support for passing data classes is a fully compatible change. Nested data are passed as either raw `dict`s or data classes, so existing programs using `dict`s will continue to work as-is without modification.
```

## Accessing Outputs

Nested outputs can now be accessed in a more strongly-typed way as well.

> Consider accessing one of the website settings from the bucket. Previously, nested outputs were returned as raw `dict`s and you'd access the value by looking it up in the `dict` by its key:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider accessing one of the website settings from the bucket. Previously, nested outputs were returned as raw `dict`s, and you'd get the value by looking it up in the `dict` by its key:
```

```python
index_document = my_bucket.website.apply(lambda w: w["indexDocument"] if w else None)
```

> Now, nested outputs are returned as data classes and values can be accessed via properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, nested outputs are returned as data classes, and values can be accessed via properties.
```

```python
index_document = my_bucket.website.apply(lambda w: w.index_document if w else None)
```

> Existing programs that lookup the values in the `dict` continue to work as-is, because the new output data classes are subclasses of `dict` and continue to return the same data with the same keys as before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Existing programs that lookup the values in the `dict` continue to work as-is because the new output data classes are subclasses of `dict` and continue to return the same data with the same keys as before.
```

## Other improvements

> Another improvement we've made is hovering tooltips in IDEs. Hovering over members in PyCharm and VS Code with Pylance now shows the member's associated documentation:

Author: This reads better to me:

```suggestion
Another improvement we've made is to hover tooltips in IDEs. Hovering over members in PyCharm and VS Code with Pylance now shows the member's associated documentation:
```

> Another improvement we've made is around hover tooltips in IDEs. Hovering over members in PyCharm and VS Code with Pylance now shows the member's associated documentation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another improvement we've made is hovering tooltips in IDEs. Hovering over members in PyCharm and VS Code with Pylance now shows the member's associated documentation:
```

![PyCharm](pycharm-hover.png)

We've additionally made some changes to reduce the amount of noise in IDE completion lists when "dotting" into individual modules.

## Conclusion

> Altogether these changes provide a drastic improvement to the Python experience.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All considered, these changes provide a major improvement to the Python experience.
```

> The improvements are available in the latest releases of the [AWS](https://pypi.org/project/pulumi-aws/), [Azure](https://pypi.org/project/pulumi-azure/), [AzureAD](https://pypi.org/project/pulumi-azuread/), [Google Cloud](https://pypi.org/project/pulumi-gcp/), and [Random](https://pypi.org/project/pulumi-random/) providers, and will be rolling out to the rest of the providers this week, along with updates to examples and documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The improvements are available in the latest releases of the [AWS](https://pypi.org/project/pulumi-aws/), [Azure](https://pypi.org/project/pulumi-azure/), [AzureAD](https://pypi.org/project/pulumi-azuread/), [Google Cloud](https://pypi.org/project/pulumi-gcp/), and [Random](https://pypi.org/project/pulumi-random/) providers. They will be rolling out to the rest of the providers this week, along with updates to examples and documentation.
```
